42 billion dollars that is the amount of
money grossed by films at the global box
office in 2019
impressive definitely surprising
probably not
especially when you consider that global
box office revenues have increased year
over year since 2005.
that was of course until covered as
you'd expect the pandemic has devastated
hollywood
resulting in an unprecedented 71
declining global box office revenue
worse yet we all have to go another year
without daniel craig's no time to die
a title that has since taken on somewhat
of an eerie meaning
putting the absence of james bond aside
movie ticket sales have actually been on
the decline for nearly two decades
despite a steady increase in population
over the same period
so if people are going to the movie
theaters less often and they are
then what exactly is driving the growth
behind global box office revenue
to answer this question you have to
understand the economics of hollywood
how do movies get funded what is the
role of government subsidies and
alternative revenue sources
how can a movie gross more than its
budget and still lose money and finally
what are the economics behind movie
theaters and their 20 buckets of popcorn
this episode of economics explained is
brought to you by skillshare the
platform that i go to when i want to
learn everything about
literally anything unlike youtube where
tutorial quality can be
dare i say it hit or miss
skillshare tutorials are always high
quality in-depth and remarkably helpful
to show you just a few things i learnt
with skillshare allow me to show off my
new kinetic typography skills
seriously check this out it's almost as
if the words you're looking at right now
are coming to life and that's the beauty
of kinetic typography which is a skill
that you too can learn from watching
this guy's course
if kinetic typography isn't your gem you
can also sharpen your drawing skills
prior to skillshare it's safe to say
that my illustration abilities had some
room for improvement but after watching
a few courses on skillshare i am now
able to sketch some pretty cool things
that i honestly never thought i was
capable of doing before
like this illustration of john maynard
keynes the father of keynesian economic
theory
stay tuned until the end to learn more
and as a special gift to the first 1000
economics explained fans the link in the
description below will provide you with
a free trial of skillshare premium
after that just 10 a month with an
annual plan so feel free to pause the
video and begin your completely free
trial now
enabling you to gain instant and
unlimited exclusive access to every
course on the skillshare platform
link is in the video description below
hollywood
the undisputed movie capital of the
world this 30 square mile area plays an
instrumental role in shaping western
culture in addition to this chief role
hollywood is also a very material
component of the us economy
if you've ever sat through a movie
credit reel it's little wonder why the
film and television
industry supports nearly two and a half
million jobs
per perspective that's greater than the
number of people employed as farmers or
miners
keep in mind these are good paying jobs
according to the motion picture
association
the industry pays more than 181 billion
dollars in wages each year
that's impressive because it also means
that people employed in this sector earn
around 47
more than the national average although
when you consider how expensive it is to
live in los angeles that's essentially
what you'd expect
so what exactly is driving hollywood's
growth
20 years ago the answer would have been
in person movie going
the studios made the movies the theaters
showed the movies
everyone was happy things were simpler
then but considering that you're now
watching this video on youtube it's
probably not a surprise to learn that
the way that we consume content has
changed drastically
as a result us movie going has been on
the decline for nearly two decades
but how can there be growth at the box
office if fewer people are going to the
movies
the answer is mostly two-fold increasing
inflation and decreasing demand
going to the movies is simply more
expensive than it used to be
in 1910 the average price of a movie
ticket was a mere 7 cents
today that number is a relatively
staggering 9.26 cents
a 132 fold increase on top of this
fewer people are physically going to the
movies despite an increase in relative
population
notably some recent films like greenland
and disney's mulan have cut out theatres
altogether
and are now releasing films online
directly to viewers
this may sound like a novel concept but
it's not
shark tank star and billionaire mark
cuban pioneered a very similar
distribution concept in the early 2000s
the dawn of online hd video long before
disney and netflix it was cuban's
magnolia pictures which released films
through the internet and
theaters at the same time however it's
worth noting that this concept wasn't
actually successful
as evidenced by the fact that you
probably haven't seen any movies using
this dual distribution model
arguably the biggest beneficiary of all
of these technological advancements in
the past two decades
excluding you the consumer have been the
largest film studios
also known as the big six the big six
dominate the box office charts part of
the reason why these studios are so big
is because they have big budgets budgets
that are often
in the hundreds of millions of dollars
but
how do movies get funded
movies are companies not just in the
profit driven sense
i mean movies are literally companies
just like apple google
and australia studios incorporate their
films for a number of legal reasons
but the main reason they incorporate is
to raise capital
in this way films are like pre-revenue
startups
they don't have a product yet and they
need funding just like the startup world
there's an investor ecosystem for the
movie world an investor ecosystem that
looks for the same things that all
investors look for
the opportunity to earn solar returns
from a venture managed by an equally
solid management team naturally this
raises a couple of questions
who provides the funding to the studios
and
do you need a nine-figure budget to make
a wildly successful movie
to answer the latter question first
absolutely not
case in point the supernatural horror
film paranormal activity
made on a shoestring budget of just 15
grand the film brought in nearly 200
million dollars
another notable success is supersize me
a documentary about fast food which in
its own right
is also a real life horror film like
paranormal activity
the movie was shot on a modest budget 65
it also crushed it at the box office
raking in over 29 million dollars
most of the viral success behind these
kinds of indie films is attributed to
the internet
tech savvy filmmakers now have an
infinite array of ways to advertise
their movies
sites like youtube can make your trailer
go viral
and after going viral you can then sell
your movie's rights to a platform like
netflix or amazon prime
but the internet isn't only disrupting
how films are distributed it's also
disrupting how they are financed
namely thanks to crowdfunding platforms
which enable you to invest in movies and
receive
royalties as for producing big budget
films the investors in these movies are
usually private equity firms and hedge
funds
although it's not uncommon to also see
family officers as investors as well as
ultra high net worth individuals
almost always these investors are
limited partners or lps
meaning they take a passive ownership
stake and don't get involved in the
movies production process
this makes sense because hedge funds and
private equity firms are often looking
to allocate capital towards what
financial analysts call
uncorrelated return streams which is a
pretentious way of saying an alternative
asset that has an income stream
unaffected by the forces that usually
affect other types of traditional assets
like stocks music is another perfect
example of this
one that is also very synergistic with
the movie industry
look no further than any sony pictures
movie featuring music from
you guessed it a sony owned record label
like columbia records
but even with the financial backing of
large institutions
studios rely on two other important
funding sources
paid product placement and government
subsidies
paid product placement it's the reason
why you see so many brand advertisements
in movies
some of which are just laughably
unbearable yes
and it's the choice of a new generation
for studios pay product placement is a
critical fundraising tool
one that allows them to retain a larger
ownership stake in their movies
without it a studio would have no other
choice but to raise more money from
their investors
which in turn dilutes the studio's
ownership so
how big of a deal is paid product
placement well
if you're an indie filmmaker it's
usually not even a remote possibility
good luck trying to get apple to sponsor
your home movie but if you're a major
studio
it's an entirely different story
consider the james bond franchise
the upcoming film no time to die will
reportedly feature over 90 million
dollars in paid product placement which
equates to about 36 percent of the
movie's entire budget
it's worth noting that james bond is
more of an outlier
most movies don't receive pay product
placement revenue anywhere near those
numbers
but perhaps the most interesting thing
about paid product placement
is that sometimes you don't even know
it's there and that's the point
it's meant to be subliminal you're not
supposed to notice it
the reason films don't disclose their
brand placements is simple
it's not legally required the movie
industry argues that making disclosures
mid-movie would be disruptive
which makes sense after all fans of
james bond already know that daniel
craig is getting paid to drive that
slick aston martin
the real ethical issue here one that is
arguably criminally overlooked
is paid product placement targeting
children children
who are easily manipulated and don't
have any concept whatsoever of the
dynamic between brands
and their non-transparent advertising
case in point the sugary pastry company
cinnabon
sponsoring the bee movie movies aren't
even the biggest recipient of paid
product placement dollars
not even close that crown belongs to tv
this lack of disclosure is a double
standard that doesn't receive
nearly enough attention if a youtuber is
paid any amount of money to promote
anything
the fcc strictly requires a creator to
be transparent and disclose such
information to their audience
failure to do so can result in a hefty
fine and potentially jail time
on the other hand film and tv
essentially get a pass
this leads us to our next topic
hollywood's very powerful lobbying
industry
and the role of government subsidies
lobbyists for hollywood
argue that the movie business is tough
so of course they need a tax break
now hearing this alone as a state
legislator should be enough
justification to at least
pause because as mentioned before if you
exclude 2020
hollywood has never done better as a
reminder global box office revenues
haven't declined in over 15 years
the idea of a booming movie industry
which doesn't even make any money on its
films
needing a tax break is a little
ridiculous in and of itself
even the independent non-profit tax
foundation describes these incentives
as failing to live up to their promises
to encourage economic growth overall
and to raise tax revenue these tax
breaks are called mpis or movie
production incentives
they are exactly what their name implies
tax incentives for the movie industry to
incentivize film production
or at least in theory that's what
they're supposed to do
they're provided on a state-by-state
basis and most states have them
originally conceived in 1992 by the
state of louisiana
the concept was to bring film production
jobs to the state
and to their credit they have created
jobs albeit almost
always at a very high cost to the
taxpayers in massachusetts for example
one study found that each film job
created by the state's mpi program cost
taxpayers a whopping 324 thousand
dollars
as any rational economist will tell you
taxpayers always pick up a tab for
ineffective government subsidies
but wait you say what about independent
filmmakers
surely it's not only the most powerful
studios that don't actually need these
subsidies who can take
advantage of them unfortunately not
before being eligible to enjoy these
sweet tax breaks production companies
are often required to spend
hundreds of thousands of dollars and as
if that wasn't bad enough
many states even offer mpis with cash
rebates on qualified purchases
now to be clear we're not talking about
tax rebates
we're talking about production cost
rebates meaning costs
that are incurred by the studio which
the studio then submits to the state for
reimbursement
specifically costs that are considered
qualified a percentage of which is
kicked back to the studio typically
around 20 to 25 percent
in a way it's the same concept as cash
back rewards except to be eligible for
these cashback perks
you don't need good credit you just need
to be a big studio
these production costs submitted to the
state for reimbursement are sometimes
artificially inflated you tell the state
what you paid for the qualified purchase
and they send you a check for 20 to 25
of the amount that you claim it's
basically the honor system
if all of this sounds like it's prone to
abuse that's because
it is and indeed it has been abused
several film directors have been charged
with tax fraud for telling state
governments one inflated number
and paying their production staff a
significantly lower number
as of the time of filming this video 22
states offer cash rebate programs
the percentage varies from state to
state as does the definition of a
qualified purchase
if all of this corrupt corporate
lobbying sounds like it's out of a movie
it's not if there's one movie that'll
probably never be made by hollywood
it would be on this very subject
if movies can be such a great investment
then why do so many hollywood films
never generate a profit for their
investors
despite having tax credits hundreds of
millions of dollars in funding
tens of millions in paid product
placement and to top it all off
extraordinary sales at the box office
which even exceed their budgets
two words hollywood accounting
that's not a term that we came up with
it's what the industry calls it
hollywood's accounting methodology is so
infamously opaque that it even has its
own wikipedia page
the scheme works by using questionable
legal and sometimes illegal expensing
systems to reduce profit
consider a movie studio that also owns a
subsidiary costume company
on the surface it's a perfect synergy
studios make films
films need actors actors need costumes
so
if you own a studio why not also own a
costume company
it's a textbook perfect vertical
integration right well
not so fast these structures don't work
in reality
because there is an obvious conflict of
interest namely the studio can mark up
the price of their costumes
purposefully over billing their own film
this type of conflict of interest profit
shifting happens all the time in
hollywood
infamously the creator of spider-man
stan lee was promised 10
of the net profits from anything based
on his characters although the case was
later settled with marvel
lee ultimately never received royalties
lee
is by no means alone screenwriter ed
solomon claims that his sony-owned
blockbuster men in black
is still not in the black this is after
nearly a quarter of a century since its
release and despite grossing over 600
million of a 90 million
budget not to mention three sequels
movie studios have precise meanings
assigned to terms like
net profit in the practice of law the
term you see here is what is known
as a defined term almost all contracts
have them
and to be clear there's nothing
inherently sinister about defined terms
that is unless you're a film studio that
decides to define such important words
in ways that are intended to be
dare i say subjective and thus open to
interpretation in the courts
but this raises a different question are
movie studios really the villain here
one group that would likely say yes
would be the venues that show the
studios films
movie theaters movie theaters or cinemas
as our viewers in the uk like to call
them
are not in the movie business movie
theaters
are in the refreshment business because
amc has the largest theater market share
in the us
will use them as a proxy for the
industry according to their 2019 annual
report food and beverage sales accounted
for nearly a third of the company's
total revenue
clocking in at 1.7 billion dollars
even more impressive the net margins on
that revenue 84
this of course begs the question if
theater companies like amc generate over
a billion dollars a year in profit from
food and beverages
then why does this industry as a whole
lose so much money
well in a way the losses are a tad
exaggerated
if you look at the last five years of
amc's financial performance
it certainly doesn't look great sure on
a taxable basis
amc lost 149 million dollars in 2019
but if you add back in depreciation
which you should because it's not a real
capital expenditure and therefore
distorts the real financial picture
you can see that imc had a real net
profit of 300 million dollars
but even 300 million in quote-unquote
real net profit of five and a half
billion in revenue
isn't a great business put another way
that means your real net margins are
only five percent so why is this
food and beverages are obviously not the
problem that segment of the business is
a cash cow
the answer to this question has to do
with the way theaters charge studios to
show their films
in the first week of a film's premiere
theaters may only receive 20 to 25
of the film's ticket price with the
remaining 75 to 80
going to the studio in the second week
the revenue share changes
with a higher percentage of revenue
going to the theater and less to the
studio
by around week six the theatre is
usually receiving the majority of the
movie ticket revenue
this continues every week until the
movie is eventually no longer shown in
theaters
this adaptive revenue share is precisely
the reason why your popcorn is so darn
expensive
if you think that studios are simply
squeezing movie theaters
well you're not alone disney received a
ton of backlash after they told theaters
that they'd be receiving a zero percent
revenue share on all ticket sales during
the premiering week of their new star
wars film
that may not seem like a fair deal but
if you run a movie theater
what are you gonna do suppose you own a
theater and decide not to show the new
star wars film because you don't
generate any revenue from the ticket
sales
you risk losing potential customers who
will take their business to a different
theater that
is showing the new star wars film in the
eyes of disney's critics
they are like the monopolizing death
star crushing theaters one galaxy at a
time
but to the capitalist jedi looking in
from the outside we can see that such an
argument is a difficult one to win
disney isn't a monopoly they're not
using darth vader's invisible
force choke to strangle theaters into
showing their movie
no not even close the reason disney has
the pricing power they're criticized for
holding is because
they simply make great movies that is
the beauty of the intergalactic system
we call free market economics
the video you just watched would not
have been possible if it wasn't for our
sponsor skillshare thanks to skillshare
you can learn virtually anything
i personally enjoyed watching the course
how not to suck at investing by our
friends at business
casual the course truly is a masterpiece
if you guys enjoy learning about
economics then you'll definitely enjoy
learning about how the stock market
works
one thing i also learned how to do with
skillshare is create music
in fact all the background audio you've
been listening to throughout this video
was all created in garageband it turns
out music theory is a lot simpler to
understand than economic theory
be one of the first 1 000 viewers to
sign up in the link in the video
description below to start your
completely free trial of skillshare
premium today
as always thanks for watching guys bye